New Observability topic (#35881)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/diagnostics/observability-with-otel.md

description: An introduction to observing .NET apps with OpenTelemetry
ms.date: 6/14/2023
---

# .NET Observability with OpenTelemetry

When running a distributed application, operators want to know how well the application is performing, and to try to detect potential problems when they are still small, before they become larger. One way that they can do this is by monitoring specific instrumentation emitted by the application, and looking for changes in metrics and logs.

## What is Observability

Observability in the context of a distributed system is the ability to monitor and analyze telemetry about the state of each component in the system, to be able to observe changes in the performance, and diagnose why those changes occur. Unlike debugging which is invasive and can affect the operation of the application, observability is intended to be transparent to the primary operation and have a small enough performance impact that it can be used continuously.

Observability is commonly done using a combination of:

- Logs - recording individual operations, such as an incoming request, a failure in a specific component, or an order having been placed.

> - Metrics - measuring counters and gauges such as count of completed requests, number of active requests, number of widgets that have been sold,  or a histogram of the request latency.

Author: should only be one "or" right?

> - Metrics - measuring counters and gauges such as count of completed requests, number of active requests, number of widgets that have been sold,  or a histogram of the request latency.

Reviewer: I was thinking of it as:

- Number of completed requests, active requests, or widgets that have been sold
Or
- A histogram of the request latency

> - Metrics - measuring counters and gauges such as count of completed requests, number of active requests, number of widgets that have been sold,  or a histogram of the request latency.

Author: This is where my grammar knowlege for use of , and ; in lists is lacking. based on https://www.merriam-webster.com/words-at-play/a-guide-to-using-semicolons how about:

- Metrics - measure counters and gauges, such as number of completed requests, active requests, or widgets that have been sold; or a histogram of the request latency.

> - Metrics - measuring counters and gauges such as count of completed requests, number of active requests, number of widgets that have been sold,  or a histogram of the request latency.

Reviewer: Based on this in the link you shared, I like what you suggested!

"A semicolon can also replace a comma between two clauses that are joined by a coordinating conjunction like and in cases where the sentence might otherwise be confusing—for example, because of particularly long clauses, or the presence of other commas."

| [OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Console](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/tree/main/src/OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Console/README.md) |  Exporter for the console, commonly used to diagnose what telemetry is being exported |
| [OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Jaeger](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/tree/main/src/OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Jaeger/README.md) |  Jaeger Exporter for OpenTelemetry .NET |
| [OpenTelemetry.Exporter.OpenTelemetryProtocol](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/tree/main/src/OpenTelemetry.Exporter.OpenTelemetryProtocol/README.md) |  Exporter using the OTLP protocol |
| [OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Prometheus.AspNetCore](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/blob/main/src/OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Prometheus.AspNetCore/README.md) |  Exporter for Prometheus implemented using an ASP.NET Core Endpoint |
| [OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Zipkin](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/blob/main/src/OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Zipkin/README.md) |  Exporter for Zipkin tracing |

> ## Example: Using Prometheus, Graphana and Jaeger

Author: I spelled Grafana wrong, way too many times.

[`UseAzureMonitor()`](https://github.com/Azure/azure-sdk-for-net/blob/d51f02c6ef46f2c5d9b38a9d8974ed461cde9a81/sdk/monitor/Azure.Monitor.OpenTelemetry.AspNetCore/src/OpenTelemetryBuilderExtensions.cs#L80) is the magic that will add the common instrumentation providers and exporters for Application Insights. We just need to add our custom `Meter` and `Activitysource` names to the registration.

If you are not already an Azure customer, you can create a free account at [https://azure.microsoft.com/free/](https://azure.microsoft.com/free/). Login to the Azure Portal, and either select an existing Application Insights resource or create a new one with [https://ms.portal.azure.com/#create/Microsoft.AppInsights](https://ms.portal.azure.com/#create/Microsoft.AppInsights).

The way that Application Insights identifies which instance should be used to store and process data is through an instrumentation key and connection string which can be found at the top right of the portal UI.

[![Connection String in Azure Portal](./media/portal_ui.thumb.png)](./media/portal_ui.png#lightbox)

> If using Azure App Service, this is automatically passed to the application as an environment variable. For other services, or running locally you need to pass it with an `APPLICATIONINSIGHTS_CONNECTION_STRING` environment variable or in `appsettings.json`. For running locally its easiest to add to `appsettings.json`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're using Azure App Service, this connection string is automatically passed to the application as an environment variable. For other services or when running locally, you need to pass it using the `APPLICATIONINSIGHTS_CONNECTION_STRING` environment variable or in `appsettings.json`. For running locally, it's easiest to add the value to `appsettings.json`:
```

- <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.Logging.ILogger%601?displayProperty=nameWithType> for [logging](../extensions/logging.md)
- <xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics.Meter?displayProperty=nameWithType> for [metrics](./metrics-instrumentation.md)
- <xref:System.Diagnostics.ActivitySource?displayProperty=nameWithType> and
<xref:System.Diagnostics.Activity?displayProperty=nameWithType> for [distributed tracing](./distributed-tracing.md)

![.NET OTel architecture](./media/layered-approach.svg)

Where OTel comes into play is that it collects telemetry from those APIs and other sources (via instrumentation libraries) and then exports them to an application performance monitoring (APM) system for storage and analysis. The benefit that OTel brings as an industry standard is a common mechanism for collection, common schemas and semantics for telemetry data, and an API for how APMs can integrate with OTel. Using OTel means that applications don't need to use APM-specific APIs or data structures; they work against the OTel standard. APMs can either implement an APM specific exporter component or use OTLP, which is a new wire standard for exporting telemetry data to the APM systems.

> Using OTel enables the use of a wide variety of APM systems including open-source systems such as [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) and [Graphana](https://grafana.com/oss/grafana/), [Azure Monitor](/azure/azure-monitor/app/app-insights-overview?tabs=net) - Microsoft's APM product in Azure, or from the many [APM vendors](https://opentelemetry.io/ecosystem/vendors/) that partner with OpenTelemetry.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using OTel enables the use of a wide variety of APM systems including open-source systems such as [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) and [Grafana](https://grafana.com/oss/grafana/), [Azure Monitor](/azure/azure-monitor/app/app-insights-overview?tabs=net) - Microsoft's APM product in Azure, or from the many [APM vendors](https://opentelemetry.io/ecosystem/vendors/) that partner with OpenTelemetry.
```

## OpenTelemetry packages

OpenTelemetry in .NET is implemented as a series of Nuget packages that form a couple of categories:

- Core API
- Instrumentation providers - these collect instrumentation from the runtime and common libraries.
- Exporters - these interface with APM systems such as Prometheus, Jaeger, and OTLP.

The following table describes the main packages.

| Package Name | Description |
| --- |  ---|
| [OpenTelemetry](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/blob/main/src/OpenTelemetry/README.md) | Main library that provides the core OTEL functionality |

> | [OpenTelemetry.API](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/blob/main/src/OpenTelemetry.Api/README.md) | APIs for exporting metrics |

Reviewer 2: The description "API for exporting Metrics" is incorrect.

Author: What is a better description?

| [OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.AspNetCore](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/blob/main/src/OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.AspNetCore/README.md) | Instrumentation for ASP.NET Core and Kestrel |
| [OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.GrpcNetClient](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/blob/main/src/OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.GrpcNetClient/README.md) | Instrumentation for gRPC Client for tracking outbound gRPC calls  |
| [OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.Http](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/blob/main/src/OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.Http/README.md) | Instrumentation for `HttpClient` and `HttpWebRequest` to track outbound HTTP calls |
| [OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.SqlClient](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/blob/main/src/OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.SqlClient/README.md) | Instrumentation for `SqlClient` used to trace database operations |
| [OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Console](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/tree/main/src/OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Console/README.md) |  Exporter for the console, commonly used to diagnose what telemetry is being exported |

> | [OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Jaeger](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/tree/main/src/OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Jaeger/README.md) |  Jaeger exporter for OpenTelemetry .NET |

Reviewer 2: Its best to avoid using Jaeger exporter as it'll be deprecated soon. OTLP exporter is sufficient to show traces in Jaeger now

> [!Note]
> Use the latest versions, as the OTel APIs are constantly evolving.

### 5. Configure OpenTelemetry with the correct providers

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/OTel-Prometheus-Graphana-Yaeger/csharp/Program.cs" id="Snippet_OTEL":::

This code uses ASP.NET Core instrumentation to get metrics and activities from ASP.NET Core. It also registers the `Metrics` and `ActivitySource` providers for metrics and tracing respectively.

The code uses the Prometheus exporter for metrics, which uses ASP.NET Core to host the endpoint, so you also need to add:

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/OTel-Prometheus-Graphana-Yaeger/csharp/Program.cs" id="Snippet_Prometheus":::

### 6. Run the project

Run the project and then access the API with the browser or curl.

``` shell
curl -k http://localhost:7275
```

Each time you request the page, it will increment the count for the number of greetings that have been made. You can access the metrics endpoint using the same base url, with the path `/metrics`. For example:

#### 6.1 Log output

> The logging statements from the code are output using `ILogger`. By default, the [Console Provider](../extensions/logging.md?tabs=command-line#configure-logging) is enabled so that output is directed to the console. OTel in .NET doesn't include any logging exporters as logging is traditionally handled well by libraries such as [Serilog](https://serilog.net/) or [NLog](https://nlog-project.org/). Also, `stdout` and `stderr` output is redirected to log files by container systems such as [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/logging/#how-nodes-handle-container-logs).

Reviewer 2: > OTel in .NET doesn't include any logging exporters

This is incorrect!

Author: What is built in?

Reviewer 2: InMemory, Console, OTLP for Logs
InMemory, Console, OTLP, Prometheus for Metrics
InMemory, Console, OTLP + Jaeger + Zipkin for Traces

Nothing is built-in, but offered as separate package. But these are the ones for which OTel has spec and require every languague to implement.

> The logging statements from the code are output using `ILogger`. By default, the [Console Provider](../extensions/logging.md?tabs=command-line#configure-logging) is enabled so that output is directed to the console. OTel in .NET doesn't include any logging exporters as logging is traditionally handled well by libraries such as [Serilog](https://serilog.net/) or [NLog](https://nlog-project.org/). Also, `stdout` and `stderr` output is redirected to log files by container systems such as [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/logging/#how-nodes-handle-container-logs).

Reviewer 2: > logging is traditionally handled well by libraries such as [Serilog](https://serilog.net/) or [NLog](https://nlog-project.org/)

Loggin in OTel .NET is handled via ILogger. This sentence reads like it is recommending Serilog, NLog, instead of ILogger - is that the intention?

Author: I thought that they plug into I logger, rather than being a replacement?

Is there a good logging source I should be using here for OTel - I feel its getting short changed, and would be happy to show it being exported via OTEL. It is shown with App Insights, but would be good to show with an OSS source too.

Reviewer 2: OTLP + ElasticSearch
OTLP + Loki
are 2 good OSS choices to demo logging.

Reviewer 2: my WIP demo that includes Loki for Logging:
https://github.com/cijothomas/opentelemetry-dotnet/tree/cijothomas/loki/docs/metrics/exemplars

(It does sent logs to Loki via OTLP+Collector . Did not have time to update the docs and polish it!)

    net.host.port: 7275
    http.method: GET
    http.scheme: https
    http.target: /
    http.url: https://localhost:7275/
    http.flavor: 1.1
    http.user_agent: curl/8.0.1
    http.status_code: 200
Resource associated with Activity:
    service.name: OTel-Prometheus-Graphana-Yaeger
    service.instance.id: e1afb619-bc32-48d8-b71f-ee196dc2a76a
    telemetry.sdk.name: opentelemetry
    telemetry.sdk.language: dotnet
    telemetry.sdk.version: 1.5.0
```

The first is the inner / custom activity we created, the second is created by ASP.NET for the request and includes tags for the http request properties. You will see that both have the same `TraceId`, this identifies a single transaction and in a distributed system can be used to correlate the traces from each service. The id's are transmitted as http headers, and ASP.NET Core will assign one if none is present when it recieves a request. HttpClient will include the headers by default on outbound requests. The Greeter activity is parented to the other activity through the `ParentSpanId` which maps to the `SpanId` of the http activity.

In a later stage we will feed this data into Jaeger to visualize the distributed traces.

> ### 7. Install and use Prometheus

Reviewer 3: Is this an opportunity to mention Azure Managed Prometheus?
https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/azure-monitor/essentials/prometheus-metrics-overview

Author: I am trying to strike a balance between showing the OSS options and our hosted solutions. We seem to usually swing too hard in one direction or the other - this is intended to be product docs rather than marketing material. I am hoping that the with the App Insights part being so much simpler, it does a good job of selling the service.

```

Modify the Prometheus yaml file to specify the port for our http scraping endpoint, and set a lower scraping interval eg:

``` yaml
  scrape_configs:
  # The job name is added as a label `job=<job_name>` to any timeseries scraped from this config.
  - job_name: "prometheus"

    # metrics_path defaults to '/metrics'
    # scheme defaults to 'http'.

    static_configs:
      - targets: ["localhost:5212"]
      - scrape_interval: 1s # poll very quickly for a more responsive demo
```

Start Prometheus, and look in the output for the port its running on, typically 9090

``` shell
>prometheus.exe
...
ts=2023-06-16T05:29:02.789Z caller=web.go:562 level=info component=web msg="Start listening for connections" address=0.0.0.0:9090
```

Open this URL in your browser. In the Prometheus UI you should now be able to query for your metrics, you use the highlighted button, it will bring up the metrics explorer which will show all the metrics available.

![Prometheus Metrics Explorer](./media/prometheus-metrics-explorer.png)

Select the `greetings_count` metric to see a graph of values.

![Graph of greetings_count](./media/prometheus-graph.png)

> ### 8. Install Grafana and create a dashboard

Reviewer 3: We also have Azure Managed Grafana.
https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/managed-grafana/overview

---
title: .NET Observability with OpenTelemetry
description: An introduction to observing .NET apps with OpenTelemetry
ms.date: 6/14/2023
ms.topic: conceptual
---

# .NET observability with OpenTelemetry

> When you run a distributed application, you want to know how well the app is performing and to detect potential problems before they become larger. One way that you can do this is by monitoring specific instrumentation emitted by the application and looking for changes in metrics and logs.

Reviewer 4: "monitoring ... instrumentation emitted ..." I don't know if these terms are well established in .NET or if there is a consistent pattern, IMHO these terms are confusing and could be misleading, might be helpful to check with @noahfalk and @tarekgh who have more context/history.

My understanding:
* "monitoring" applies to "distributed application"
* "instrumentation" cannot be "emitted", "instrumentation" is the artifact that hooks the telemetry signal/events, and an implementation (e.g. SDK) is configured to subscribe to the instrumentations and "emit" the data via some exporters.

## What is observability

> Observability in the context of a distributed system is the ability to monitor and analyze telemetry about the state of each component, to be able to observe changes in performance, and to diagnose why those changes occur. Unlike debugging, which is invasive and can affect the operation of the application, observability is intended to be transparent to the primary operation and have a small enough performance impact that it can be used continuously.

Reviewer 4: Very common I've seen "observabiity = monitoring, diagnostics, analytics".
For example:
* Monitor the CPU metrics to get an overall sense of resource utilization.
* Analyze the usage pattern to better forecast the business growth or capacity planning.
* Diagnose a particular distributed trace to see why it is taking minutes to finish.

Reviewer 4: @samsp-msft You've brought up a topic which is very interesting to me (I used to work on debuggers) - I have a gut feeling that debuggers can be improved to be non-invasive for most of the cases and that should be the direction, happy to chat more offline.

Observability is commonly done using a combination of:

- Logs - record individual operations, such as an incoming request, a failure in a specific component, or an order being placed.

> - Metrics - measuring counters and gauges such as number of completed requests, active requests, widgets that have been sold; or a histogram of the request latency.

Reviewer 4: Minor suggestion - I don't know how many folks are familiar with histogram, maybe something like "99% latency" will be easier for them to understand?

- Distributed tracing - track requests and activities across components in a distributed system so that you can see where time is spent and track down specific failures.

Together, logs, metrics, and distributed tracing are known as the *3 pillars of observability*.

Each pillar might include telemetry data from:

> - The .NET runtime, such as the garbage collector or JIT.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- The .NET runtime, such as the garbage collector or JIT compiler.
```

> - Libraries, such as from Kestrel (the ASP.NET web server) and `HttpClient`.

Reviewer 4: Maybe add a link https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.net.http.httpclient?view=net-7.0

- Application-specific telemetry that's fired by your code.

## Observability approaches in .NET

There are a few different ways to achieve observability in .NET applications:

- Explicitly in code, by referencing and using an SDK such as OpenTelemetry. If you have access to the source code and can rebuild the app, then this is the most powerful and configurable mechanism.
- Out-of-process using [EventPipe](./eventpipe.md). Tools such as [dotnet-monitor](./dotnet-monitor.md) can listen to logs and metrics and then process them without affecting any code.

> - [Using a startup hook](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/docs/design/features/host-startup-hook.md), assemblies can be injected into the process that can then collect instrumentation. This mechanism enables creating instrumentation for libraries that weren't designed for it but can be fragile to version conflicts between application and instrumentation dependencies. An example of this approach is [OpenTelemetry .NET Automatic Instrumentation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet-instrumentation/blob/main/docs/README.md).

Author: I want to help direct people to .NET monitor instead - and they need to start to understand why. Otherwise they will ask why do all this stuff if it can happen automatically for me.

> - [Using a startup hook](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/docs/design/features/host-startup-hook.md), assemblies can be injected into the process that can then collect instrumentation. This mechanism enables creating instrumentation for libraries that weren't designed for it but can be fragile to version conflicts between application and instrumentation dependencies. An example of this approach is [OpenTelemetry .NET Automatic Instrumentation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet-instrumentation/blob/main/docs/README.md).

Reviewer 5: We can include a link to dotnet-monitor in the bullet for code-less instrumentation without needing to dive into implementation details.

> ## What is OpenTelemetry

Author: I started but I'm not sure if that just adds more confusion, as it leads to providing more details. -->

For example, an app's code makes the following logging call:

``` c#
logger.LogInformation("Customer {customerid} added {n} of {productid} to shopping cart {cartid}", customerId, itemCount, productId, cartId);
```

to provide status about what is happening during a shopping experience. The message is collected, either via the ILogger Console Provider and `stdout`, or via another ILogger provider, such as one that does semantic logging. The message and parameters need to be egressed out of the process to a logging data store. In a distributed system, it is commonly a separate service, that is used to collect data from multiple services, and potentially multiple instances of each of those services, so needs to be sent across the network. Rather than sending each log message as it happens, they are usually buffered and asynchronously sent as a batch. Logging information not only includes the message, but also a timestamp, and information on the process that fired it. If [`Scopes`](../extensions/logging#log-scopes) are used it can include addition information such as the TraceID and SpanId for distributed tracing, so that log messages can be correlated with tracing activity. 

The log store will store all the log records together, and have query capabilities that can be used to analyze what happened. For example, being able to query all the activity for a specific shopping cart or user. By counting the results charts can be created to report on metrics that may not explicitly collected by the application - this is useful for drilling down when investigating issues to see when a problem may have occurred.  

Logging is usually asynchronous and best-effort - so should not be used as the basis for how billing or order processing is built - it should be treated as ancillary information about how the service has operated, not be used for the operation of the service.

> ## What is OpenTelemetry

Reviewer 5: Perhaps there is a middle ground where the description is specific to OpenTelemetry, but more detailed than the list you have below? My worry is that I am anticipating devs that read the list below won't really understand it and won't click through each link to gain that understanding. Perhaps something like:

[OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) (OTel) is a cross-platform, open standard for collecting and emitting telemetry data. OpenTelemetry includes:
1. [APIs](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/instrumentation/manual/) used by app developers and library authors to record telemetry data as code is running.
2. [APIs](some_link) that app developers use to configure what portion of the recorded data will be sent across the network, where it will be sent to, and how it may be filtered, buffered, enriched, and transformed.
3. [Semantic conventions](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions) provide guidance on naming and content of telemetry data. It is important for the apps that produce telemetry data and the tools that receive the data to agree on what
different kinds of data means and what sorts of data are useful so that the tools can provide effective analysis.
4. An interface for [exporters](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/components/#exporters). Exporters are plugins that allow telemetry data to be transmitted in specific formats to different telemetry backends.
5. [OTLP](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/main/docs/README.md) is a vendor neutral network protocol option for transmitting telemetry data. Some tools and vendors support this protocol in addition to pre-existing proprietary protocols they may have.

[OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) (OTel) is a cross-platform, open standard for collecting and emitting telemetry data. OpenTelemetry includes:

- [APIs](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/instrumentation/manual/) for libraries to use to emit telemetry
- [Semantic conventions](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions) for metrics & traces

> - Standard for [exporter components](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/)

Reviewer 5: Exporters are in-process libraries that know how to format data for a specific backend. This link to OTel collector appears unrelated. I think you want: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/components/#exporters

- [OTLP wire protocol](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/main/docs/README.md) for transmitting telemetry data

There are OpenTelemetry implementations for most languages and platforms, including .NET.

## .NET Observability architecture

> The .NET OpenTelemetry implementation is a little different from other platforms, as .NET provides logging, metrics, and activity APIs in the BCL. That means OTel doesn't need to provide APIs for library authors to use. The .NET implementation uses these existing APIs for instrumentation:

Reviewer 4: Two suggestions:
1. maybe reword BCL considering many readers might not know what that means.
2. instead of saying ".NET uses existing APIs", use ".NET and OpenTelemetry community have been working closely ..." (feel free to steal some wording from https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/issues/48309#issuecomment-1558631599 and rephrase it)

- <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.Logging.ILogger%601?displayProperty=nameWithType> for [logging](../extensions/logging.md)
- <xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics.Meter?displayProperty=nameWithType> for [metrics](./metrics-instrumentation.md)
- <xref:System.Diagnostics.ActivitySource?displayProperty=nameWithType> and
<xref:System.Diagnostics.Activity?displayProperty=nameWithType> for [distributed tracing](./distributed-tracing.md)

![.NET OTel architecture](./media/layered-approach.svg)

Where OTel comes into play is that it collects telemetry from those APIs and other sources (via instrumentation libraries) and then exports them to an application performance monitoring (APM) system for storage and analysis. The benefit that OTel brings as an industry standard is a common mechanism for collection, common schemas and semantics for telemetry data, and an API for how APMs can integrate with OTel. Using OTel means that applications don't need to use APM-specific APIs or data structures; they work against the OTel standard. APMs can either implement an APM specific exporter component or use OTLP, which is a new wire standard for exporting telemetry data to the APM systems.

> Using OTel enables the use of a wide variety of APM systems including open-source systems such as [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) and [grafana](https://grafana.com/oss/grafana/), [Azure Monitor](/azure/azure-monitor/app/app-insights-overview?tabs=net) - Microsoft's APM product in Azure, or from the many [APM vendors](https://opentelemetry.io/ecosystem/vendors/) that partner with OpenTelemetry.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Using OTel enables the use of a wide variety of APM systems including open-source systems such as [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) and [Grafana](https://grafana.com/oss/grafana/), [Azure Monitor](/azure/azure-monitor/app/app-insights-overview?tabs=net) - Microsoft's APM product in Azure, or from the many [APM vendors](https://opentelemetry.io/ecosystem/vendors/) that partner with OpenTelemetry.
```

## OpenTelemetry packages

> OpenTelemetry in .NET is implemented as a series of Nuget packages that form a couple of categories:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
OpenTelemetry in .NET is implemented as a series of NuGet packages that form a couple of categories:
```

| [OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.SqlClient](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/blob/main/src/OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.SqlClient/README.md) | Instrumentation for `SqlClient` used to trace database operations |
| [OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Console](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/tree/main/src/OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Console/README.md) |  Exporter for the console, commonly used to diagnose what telemetry is being exported |
| [OpenTelemetry.Exporter.OpenTelemetryProtocol](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/tree/main/src/OpenTelemetry.Exporter.OpenTelemetryProtocol/README.md) |  Exporter using the OTLP protocol |
| [OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Prometheus.AspNetCore](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/blob/main/src/OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Prometheus.AspNetCore/README.md) |  Exporter for Prometheus implemented using an ASP.NET Core endpoint |
| [OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Zipkin](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/blob/main/src/OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Zipkin/README.md) |  Exporter for Zipkin tracing |

## Example: Use Prometheus, Grafana and Jaeger

> This example uses Prometheus for metrics collection, grafana for creating a dashboard, and Jaeger to show distributed tracing.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This example uses Prometheus for metrics collection, Grafana for creating a dashboard, and Jaeger to show distributed tracing.
```

``` shell
dotnet new web
```

### 2. Add metrics and activity definitions

The following code defines a new metric (`greetings.count`) for the number of times the API has been called, and a new activity source (`OtPrGrYa.Sample`).

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/OTel-Prometheus-Grafana-Yaeger/csharp/Program.cs" id="Snippet_CustomMetrics":::

### 3. Create an API endpoint

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/OTel-Prometheus-Grafana-Yaeger/csharp/Program.cs" id="Snippet_MapGet":::

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/OTel-Prometheus-Grafana-Yaeger/csharp/Program.cs" id="Snippet_SendGreeting":::

> [!Note]
> The API definition does not use anything specific to OpenTelemetry. It uses the .NET APIs for observability.

### 4. Reference the OpenTelemetry packages

Use the NuGet Package Manager or command line to add the following NuGet packages:

:::code language="xml" source="snippets/OTel-Prometheus-grafana-Yaeger/csharp/OTel-Prometheus-Grafana-Yaeger.csproj" id="Snippet_References":::

> [!Note]
> Use the latest versions, as the OTel APIs are constantly evolving.

> ### 5. Configure OpenTelemetry with the correct providers

Author: Those cover the how, but didn't explain the why, and give the bigger picture. They are also specific to a telemetry type. We could link those back to this if you want.

> ### 5. Configure OpenTelemetry with the correct providers

Reviewer 5: > We could link those back to this if you want.

That is fine by me as long as the flow still feels reasonable.

> Those cover the how, but didn't explain the why, and give the bigger picture

Yeah, I'm not trying to eliminate the new portions of your content, just reduce duplication in the overlap if it makes sense to do so.

There are a couple of options for how logs can be egressed from .NET:

- `stdout` and `stderr` output is redirected to log files by container systems such as [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/logging/#how-nodes-handle-container-logs).
- Using logging libraries that will integrate with ILogger, these include [Serilog](https://serilog.net/) or [NLog](https://nlog-project.org/).
- Using logging providers for OTel such as OTLP or the Azure Monitor exporter shown further below.

#### 6.2 Access the metrics

You can access the metrics using the `/metrics` endpoint.

``` shell
curl -k https://localhost:7275/
Hello World!

curl -k https://localhost:7275/metrics
# TYPE greetings_count counter
# HELP greetings_count Counts the number of greetings
greetings_count 1 1686894204856

# TYPE current_connections gauge
# HELP current_connections Number of connections that are currently active on the server.
current_connections{endpoint="127.0.0.1:7275"} 1 1686894204856
current_connections{endpoint="[::1]:7275"} 0 1686894204856
current_connections{endpoint="[::1]:5212"} 1 1686894204856
...
```

> The metrics output is a snapshot of the metrics at the time the endpoint is requested. The results are provided in Prometheus format, which is human readable but better understood by Prometheus. That topic is covered in the next stage.

Reviewer 4: Prometheus exposition format https://github.com/prometheus/docs/blob/main/content/docs/instrumenting/exposition_formats.md

#### 6.3 Access the tracing

> If you look at the console for the server, you'll see the output from the console trace provider, which outputs the information in a human readable format. This should show two activities, one from your custom `ActivitySource`, and the other from ASP.NET Core:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you look at the console for the server, you'll see the output from the console trace exporter, which outputs the information in a human readable format. This should show two activities, one from your custom `ActivitySource`, and the other from ASP.NET Core:
```

You can make your app a little more interesting by having it make HTTP calls to itself.

- Add an `HttpClient` factory to the application

   :::code language="csharp" source="snippets/OTel-Prometheus-Grafana-Yaeger/csharp/Program.cs" id="Snippet_HttpClientFactory":::

- Add a new endpoint for making nested greeting calls

   :::code language="csharp" source="snippets/OTel-Prometheus-Grafana-Yaeger/csharp/Program.cs" id="Snippet_MapNested":::

- Implement the endpoint so that it makes HTTP calls that can also be traced. In this case, it calls back to itself in an artificial loop (really only applicable to demo scenarios).

   :::code language="csharp" source="snippets/OTel-Prometheus-Grafana-Yaeger/csharp/Program.cs" id="Snippet_SendNestedGreeting":::

This results in a more interesting graph with a pyramid shape for the requests, as each level waits for the response from the previous call.

[![Jaeger nested dependency results](./media/jaeger-nested-activity-details.thumb.png)](./media/jaeger-nested-activity-details.png#lightbox)

## Example: Use Azure Monitor and Application Insights

> In the previous example, you used separate open-source applications for metrics and tracing. There are many commercial APM systems available to choose from. In Azure, the primary application-monitoring product in is Application Insights, which is part of Azure Monitor.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In the previous example, you used separate open-source applications for metrics and tracing. There are many commercial APM systems available to choose from. In Azure, the primary application-monitoring product is Application Insights, which is part of Azure Monitor.
```

> One of the advantages of an integrated APM product is that it can correlate the different observability data sources. To make the ASP.NET experience with Azure Monitor easier, they've created a wrapper package that does most of the heavy lifting of configuring OpenTelemetry.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
One of the advantages of an integrated APM product is that it can correlate the different observability data sources. To make the ASP.NET experience with Azure Monitor easier, a wrapper package is provided which does most of the heavy lifting of configuring OpenTelemetry.
```

Reviewer 4: @rajkumar-rangaraj please help the wording here.

Application Insights identifies which instance to use to store and process data through an instrumentation key and connection string that are found at the top right side of the portal UI.

[![Connection String in Azure Portal](./media/portal_ui.thumb.png)](./media/portal_ui.png#lightbox)

If you're using Azure App Service, this connection string is automatically passed to the application as an environment variable. For other services or when running locally, you need to pass it using the `APPLICATIONINSIGHTS_CONNECTION_STRING` environment variable or in `appsettings.json`. For running locally, it's easiest to add the value to `appsettings.json`:

```json
"APPLICATIONINSIGHTS_CONNECTION_STRING": "InstrumentationKey=12345678-abcd-abcd-abcd-12345678..."
```

> [!Note]
> Replace the value with the one from your instance.

> When you run the application, telemetry will be sent to App Insights. You should now get logs, metrics, and distributed traces for your application.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When you run the application, telemetry will be sent to Application Insights. You should now get logs, metrics, and distributed traces for your application.
```
